---
title: 'One-Way Digital Interview For Columbia University Data Science Master'
date: 2020-02-13
permalink: /posts/2020/02/BP/
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Interview
---

Interview took 20 minutes, results will go out during Mid March. Finger crossed.

Introduction to Columbia University Digital Inverview
------
The digital interview will take about 20 minutes to finish. There are five questions, all of them are behavoral questions. No technical question. Each question will have 2 minutes to answer, but the time left for thinking is extremely short. Luckily you have one attempt to rerecord for each question. And there are no time limitations between those two attempts.


My questions:
------
1. Tell me about a time that you completed a group project. What was your role on the project? And how did you ensure you fulfilled your responsibilities to the team.
1. The Data Science Institute's mission focuses on "Data for Good". What does "Data for Good" mean to you?
1. Can you tell me about your most challenging project? Why was it challenging? How did the project turn out?
1. Tell me about the most recent project you need to code. What are the contributions that you did. What you have learned from it?
1. Can you tell me about any extra-curricular activities that you are involved with?


My Suggestions:
------
1. Get prepared, just chill. Since there are no time limitations between each question. You have enough time to prepare for it.
1. Turn on all the lights in your room. Light is essential for a good background.
1. Make your backgrounds look professional.

And finally, good luck to you all.

